+++
title = "Debt Free, Finally"
date = 2025-03-15T00:00:00+07:00
description = "Sharing reasoning of my decision to be debt free"
draft = true

[taxonomies]
tags = ["life", "financial"]
+++

This is not a financial advice, please consult with your financial advisor before making any financial decisions.

## Thinking About It
Last year I made a decision to pay off all my debts.
I technically paid off my mortgage in March 2024, my last installment for my car loan was in March 2025.
The mortgage was technically paid off by putting enough money in the autodebit bank account to cover the remaining installment, I just needed to verify
whether the deduction was correct or not once a month, no need to worry about the mortgage anymore.

Decision was not easy but was made relatively quick, calculation wise I would make more money if I invested the money in the stock market or put it in other investment.
Actually I was quite comfortable with the debts, I have my own reasons to be debt-free:
* I can put more focus on building wealth.
* I have more room to take risks, be more bold when there's a good opportunity. Definitely have more courage to average down on good stocks when the market is down.
* Generally I feel happier without debt, I can't measure it but it feels really good! I sleep better as well.


## Technically paying off mortgage?
My mortgage started in 2018 Apr, the mortgage had a fixed rate of 6.5% for 5 years then floating afterwards.
I think it's worth to share that conceptually, mortgage installment amount consists of 2 parts:
* Principal amount, this is the amount that will reduce the remaining mortgage amount.
* Interest amount, this goes into the bank pocket.

For every installment payment, it will deduct the principal amount and some of it goes to the interest.
Most banks use annuity calculation for mortgage in which the interest amount is higher at the beginning of the mortgage period and the principal amount is higher at the end of the period.
In other words your early installment payments will just mostly paying for the interest, goes into the bank pocket 💰.

Back to the mortgage deal, 6.5% was quite high compared to other banks, but it had benefit that saving account rate will match the mortgage rate.
I got 6.5% interest rate on saving account for the first 5 years, the 6th year it was floating around 13.5% because mortgage interest rate was also 13.5%.
The interest on the saving account is not paid directly into the account balance, rather it deducts the interest from the mortgage installment amount.
Technically the mortgage interest would be 0 if you put enough money in the saving account and all the installment payment will go directly to principal, 100% of installment payment will deduct the remaining mortgage amount.


What I did to pay off the mortgage was quite simple, I looked up the outstanding mortgage then divide the amount by net % after tax on interest, that's the amount I need to put in the saving account
so that the installment would be accounted 100% on the principal.
Just for example, suppose tax on interest is 20% and my outstanding mortgage is 1000, I would need to put 1000 / (1 - 0.2) = 1250 in the saving account.
It will be more than enough to cover the remaining installment.
The reason I like this approach compared to paying all at once is because in my case there's a 3% penalty for full loan settlement,
in addition to that if there's a super urgent needs for cash I can just withdraw the money from the saving account, though I forbid myself to do that.


## Moving forward
Having an option to leverage is good, but I think it's better to avoid debt if you can.
Debt can give a false sense of security, it can easily confuse you to think that you have the capability to buy things.

Since the mortgage paid off, I always try to avoid debt. Even if there's a 0% installment plan on some of my big purchases, I always choose to pay in full.
Paying in full have its own benefits especially for collecting miles, some banks have a policy that you won't get the miles if you choose to pay in installment.
